Ablation – the loss of ice and snow, especially from a glacier, through
melting, evaporation and sublimation.
Absolute humidity – the mass of water vapour in a given volume of air.
Abstraction – the extraction of water from rivers and boreholes for public
water supply, agriculture etc.
Abyssal plain – the deepest part of the ocean covering vast areas of ocean
floor. Submarine mountain chains and trenches interrupt the relatively
flat plain.
Accumulation – the addition or gain of snow and ice to a glacier over time.
Acidification – decreasing pH, e.g. of the oceans due to an increase in the
uptake of CO2
 from the atmosphere.
Active layer – the near surface layer in a periglacial environment which
seasonally freezes and thaws.
Adiabatic expansion – the expansion of a parcel of air due to a decrease in
pressure. Expansion causes cooling.
Advanced countries (ACs) – countries that share a number of important
economic characteristics, including well-developed financial markets,
high degrees of financial intermediation and diversified economic
structures with rapidly growing service sectors.
Advection – the horizontal movement of an air mass which often results in
either heating or cooling.
Aeolian – erosional, transportational and depositional processes by the
wind.
Aggradation – the disposition of sediment in a river channel which results
in a rise in the bed elevation.
Agribusiness – a large scale farming practice run on business lines.
Agro-ecosystems – an ecosystem that is managed to produce food.
Alases – flat-floored, steep-side depressions in periglacial environments.
Albedo – proportion of sunlight reflected from a surface.
Algal bloom – a rapid increase in algae in a water system.
Alkaloid – a naturally occurring chemical compound. The active ingredient
in many medicinal drugs, e.g. morphine.
Alluvial fan – a cone of sediment deposited by a river where it leaves a
steep upland course and enters a lowland area.
Anthropocene – the current geological period where humankind is the
main driver of environmental change.
Appropriate technology – technology which is ‘appropriate’ in its context
of use. It is small scale, can be managed locally and often uses skills
available in the local community.
Aquifer – a water-bearing band of porous or permeable rock.
Archipelago – a closely grouped cluster of islands.
Arête – a narrow, ‘knife-edged’ ridge between two corries.
Artesian aquifer – a confined aquifer containing groundwater that when
tapped will rise to the surface under its own pressure.
Artesian pressure – the hydrostatic pressure exerted on groundwater in a
confined aquifer occupying a synclinal structure.
Aspect – the direction a slope faces.
Asthenosphere – the layer in the Earth’s mantle below the lithosphere. The
high temperatures cause the rocks to soften and become viscous meaning
that they can easily deform.
Asylum seeker – a person who seeks entry to another country by claiming
to be a refugee.
Atmosphere – the thin envelope of gases (mainly nitrogen and oxygen) that
surrounds the Earth.
Attrition – the erosion of sediment transported by rivers, glaciers, waves
and wind.
Backwash – flow of water down a beach after a wave has broken.
Bajada – a series of alluvial fans that merge to form a continuous apron of
sediment along a mountain front in dryland regions.
Balance of payments – difference between a country’s inflows and
outflows of money, including all transactions with the rest of the world
for goods and services, flows of FDI and migrant remittances, over a
period of time.
Barchan – a discrete, crescent-shaped sand dune, with horns pointing
downwind.
Barrage – a dam built across an estuary or bay so that the rise and/or fall in
the tides can be used to generate energy by the turning of turbines.
Beach recharge – the addition of sediment to a beach by humans to
increase its size and volume.
Benioff zone – boundary between a subducting ocean plate and the overriding continental plate at a destructive boundary.
Bio-prospecting – the discovery and commercial exploitation of biological
resources, e.g. genetic material in organisms.
Biodegrade – the breakdown of a substance through biochemical reactions
or the actions of organisms such as bacteria into different compounds.
Biodiversity – the number of different plant, animal, fungi etc. species in a
given area.
Biodiversity hotspot – a region that is rich in biodiversity and where
species and habitats are threatened with destruction.
Biological weathering – the breakdown of rocks through the chemical and
physical action of living organisms, e.g. burrowing, tree roots etc.
Bioluminescence – the ability of some organisms to generate light from
their bodies.
Biomass – weight of living matter per unit area (usually b/m2
).
Biopiracy – the exploitation of medicinal drugs from wild environments by
pharmaceutical companies with little or no benefit to indigenous people.
Biosphere – the space at the Earth’s surface and within the atmosphere
occupied by living organisms.
Black smoker – hydrothermal vent on the ocean floor at constructive or
destructive plate boundaries. The water carries high amounts of metal
sulphides.
Block disintegration – physical weathering of massively jointed rocks
which results in boulder-sized rock debris.
Blockfield – a large expanse of boulders strewn across a level surface, often
in mountain environments.
Blue water navy – a navy capable of operating away from its home bases
and across the deep oceans.
Butte – an isolated, steep-sided, flat-topped rock outcrop.
Caldera – large-scale volcanic crater formed as a result of an explosive
eruption which emptied the magma chamber causing the volcano sides to
subside.
Canopy – the uppermost layer of treetops and branches in a forest or
woodland ecosystem.
Cap and trade – an internal scheme to control carbon emissions. A marketbased solution to climate change where polluters either cut their
emissions or incur extra costs by buying tradable carbon credits.
Capital intensive – high levels of investment in manufacturing in plant and
machinery per employee.
Capital – accumulated wealth of any kind used in producing more wealth;
this may include tangibles such as machinery, buildings, land, and
intangibles such as money, investment finance, company stocks.
Capitalist – the socio-economic system in which production of goods and
services takes place to generate profit. A key driving force in the system
is people’s desire for gain and self-interest.
Caprock – a resistant layer of rock often on a plateau-like surface, which
protects older weaker rocks from denudation.
Carbon capture and storage – the removal of CO2
 from emissions by
thermal power stations and its storage in disused oil and gas wells
underground.
Carbon credits – allowances that permit given levels of CO2
 emissions by
businesses. Excess emissions must by covered by trading carbon credits.
Carbon fertilisation – rising CO2
 levels in the atmosphere which increase
photosynthesis and stimulate plant growth.
Carbon offset – market-based approach to limiting carbon emissions.
Businesses receive annual carbon quotas (credits). These can be
sold/bought on international carbon markets.
Carbon sink – a long-term store of carbon in ocean sediments, carbonate
rocks, forests etc.
Carbon source – inputs of carbon to the atmosphere by respiration,
combustion and decomposition.
Carbonaceous rock – rocks mainly comprising the fossilised remains of
plants, e.g. coal, lignite.
Carbonate rock – rocks comprising carbonate minerals (e.g. CaCO3
) such
as limestone and chalk.
Carrying capacity – the maximum number of a species that can be
supported in a given area in a sustainable way.
Catchment – the area drained by a river and its tributaries i.e. a drainage
basin.
Central tendency – the middle value in a data set, e.g. mean, median,
mode.
Chelation – a type of chemical weathering caused by acids derived from
rainwater and dead organic material.
Chemical weathering – the in situ breakdown of rocks by chemical
processes such as oxidation, solution and hydrolysis.
Cirrus cloud – a high altitude, feather-like cloud made of ice crystals.
Civil society – NGOs and other organisations that are independent of
governments, working voluntarily, either individually or collectively, in
support of citizens and communities throughout the world.
Closed system – a system with inputs and outputs of energy, but without
any movement of materials across system boundaries.
Coastal squeeze – the erosion of mudflats, sand flats and beaches, trapped
between rising sea level and hard coastal defence structures (e.g. sea
walls).
Cold seeps – low temperature mineral-rich springs flowing from the ocean
floor.
Commodity – a good or material (not a service) interchangeable through
trade or commerce such as a raw material.
Communicable disease – an infectious disease that spreads from host to
host.
Comparative advantage – the principle that countries or regions benefit
from specialising in an economic activity in which they are relatively
more efficient or skilled.
Composite cone volcano – see strato-volcano.
Comprehensive redevelopment – the planning and rebuilding of a
substantial part of an urban area involving the demolition of nearly all of
the previous buildings and infrastructure.
Compressing flow – the movement of glacial ice down a gentle gradient,
during which it thickens.
Concordant – a coastline with bands of different geologies lying parallel to
the shore.
Condensation – the phase change of water vapour (gas) to water (liquid).
Contagious diffusion – the process by which a disease spreads through
direct contact with a carrier.
Contagious disease – a disease spread by contact or indirect contact
between people, e.g. Ebola.
Containerisation – the shipping of goods (by road, rail and sea) in
standard-sized metal boxes. It allows efficient, mechanised handling of
large volumes of goods and lowers transport costs.
Continental drift – the theory that the continents are mobile and have
moved across the Earth’s surface through geological time.
Continental rise – gently sloping ocean floor between the continental slope
and the abyssal plain.
Continental shelf – the gently sloping offshore extension of a continent
extending into the ocean as far as the continental slope.
Continental slope – where the continental shelf becomes steeper as it
descends to the deep ocean.
Conurbation – large urban area in population and areal terms, made up of
the merging together of previously separate towns and cities.
Convection – the motion of a gas or liquid which when warmed rises until
eventually it cools and sinks in a continuous circulation.
Coral bleaching – the loss of algae (which give coral its colours) from
coral due to an increase in water temperature.
Core region – an area where economic activity is concentrated and living
standards are relatively high.
Corporate social responsibility – commitment and initiative of a
corporation to assess and take responsibility for its social and
environmental impact. This includes its ethical behaviour towards the
quality of life of its work force, their families and local communities, and
its contribution to economic development and the natural environment.
Corrasion – the scouring and erosion of rock surfaces by sediments
transported by rivers, glaciers, waves and wind (also known as abrasion).
Crevasse splays – low-lying areas of deposited sediment between levées.
Cryoturbation – frost churning of layers of regolith in periglacial
environments.
Cryptobiotic crust – communities of cyanobacteria, fungi, lichens and
mosses which form a fragile surface layer in drylands.
Cumulative frequency curve – a frequency curve that shows the
proportion of data above (or below) a specific threshold (e.g. zero).
Cumuliform cloud – a cloud formed by convection with a rounded-top,
lumpy appearance and flat base.
Cusps – a pointed and regular arc pattern of sediment on a beach.
Cyber conflict – use of the internet, cellular technologies and space-based
communications for malevolent and/or destructive purposes in order to
change or modify political, military and economic interactions between
entities such as states, corporations and individuals.
De-industrialisation – the absolute or relative decline in the importance of
manufacturing in the economy of a country or region.
Debris flow – mass movements of coarse boulders, mud, timber etc. in
channels following periods of torrential rainfall.
Decarbonation – the reduction or removal of carbon emissions from
energy sources.
Deflation – erosion of clay and silt-sized particles by wind action in
drylands.
Degradation (of land) – a process leading to a significant reduction in the
production capacity of land.
Denudation – the wearing away of the Earth’s surface by weathering and
erosion.
Dependent variable – a variable affected by change in a related
(independent) variable, e.g. rainfall affected by altitude.
Deposition – the laying down of sediment transported by rivers, waves,
glaciers and wind, as energy levels decline.
Deprivation – when a person’s well-being falls below a generally regarded
minimum. A range of factors are usually included to measure this such as
employment, housing, health and education.
Desert pavement – an almost continuous surface of rocky particles in
drylands, resulting from the removal of finer particles by wind action.
Desertification – the reduction in agricultural capacity due to
overexploitation of resources and natural processes such as drought. Only
in extreme cases does it result in desert-like conditions.
Development gap – difference in prosperity and well-being between rich
and poor countries. This could be measured, for example, by GDP per
capita and HDI.
Dew – deposits of moisture on the ground and vegetation due to
condensation caused by radiative cooling, most often at night.
Dew point – the critical temperature at which condensation occurs.
Diagenesis – the process by which snow becomes ice due to compression.
Diaspora – the spread of an ethnic or national group from their homeland,
e.g. Jews from Israel or Kurds from Kurdistan.
Diffusion – the process by which a disease spreads outwards from its
geographical source.
Disaster – natural hazards (e.g. earthquakes, floods) that result in major
loss of life, injury and economic damage.
Discordant – a coastline with bands of different geologies lying
perpendicular to the shore.
Dispersion – the distribution of values in a data set around a central value.
Disposable income – the proportion of a person’s income that is left after
essentials such as housing, food, clothing, heating and taxes have been
paid.
Distributaries – small branching stream channels that flow away from a
main stream or river.
Downwelling – the sinking of dense, salty (or cold) water in the oceans.
Drift – the collective term for all glacial deposits, including till and
outwash.
Drumlins – streamlined mounds of glacial drift.
Dyke – a vertical or near vertical minor intrusion of magma through
surrounding older rocks.
Dynamic equilibrium – a system displaying unrepeated average states
through time.
Earthquake focus – point in the crust where rocks fracture, releasing
energy.
Economic migrant – a person who moves from another country, region or
place, involving a permanent or semi-permanent change of residence, to
improve their standard of living or job opportunities.
Economic restructuring – the change in proportions of people working in
various economic sectors, e.g. the change in ACs from secondary to
tertiary employment.
Economies of scale – internal economies of scale are savings in unit costs
that arise from large-scale production, derived from within a plant;
external economies of scale are savings made by a firm that arise from
outside the firm itself, such as benefits of proximity to other firms or
infrastructure.
Ecosystem – a community of living organisms and their relationships with
each other and the environment.
Ecosystem service – the processes by which the environment produces
resources used by humans such as oxygen, water, food and materials.
Edge city – substantial urban development on the fringe of an existing
conurbation. They are often formally planned and are relatively selfsufficient.
Effusive eruption – a gentle free-flowing basic eruption of lava, e.g. basalt.
Emerging and developing countries – countries that do not share all the
economic development characteristics required to be advanced, and also
are not eligible for the Poverty Reduction and Growth Trust, identified by
the IMF.
Emigration – out-migration of people from a country, which involves
permanent change of residence.
Endemic disease – a disease that exits permanently in a geographical area
or human group.
Energy security – the uninterrupted availability of energy sources at an
affordable price.
Enhanced greenhouse effect – increasing levels of CO2
 and other
greenhouse gases in the atmosphere amplifying the natural greenhouse
effect.
Enhanced weathering – artificial crushing of rocks to increase surface
areas and absorption of atmospheric CO2
 by silicates to form carbonate
minerals.
Entitlements – the purchasing and bargaining power that gives people
access to food and other basic needs.
Epicentre – point at the surface directly above an earthquake focus.
Epidemic – a disease outbreak that spreads quickly through the population
of a geographical area.
Epidemiology – the study of how and why diseases occur in different
groups of people.
Equilibrium – a long-term balance between inputs and outputs in a system.
Equinox – the dates when the Sun is overhead at the Equator (21 March
and 21 September) and when the length of day and night are the same
everywhere on the planet.
Erg – a sand desert.
Erosion – the wearing away and/or removal of rock and other material by a
moving force.
Escarpment – a tilt block forming an extensive upland area, with a short,
steep (scarp) slope and a long, gentle (dip) slope.
Esker – a long, sinuous ridge composed of stratified sand and gravel.
Eustatic – worldwide change in sea level.
Eutrophication – the process whereby nutrient enrichment in water
(streams, rivers, lakes) leads to a fall in oxygen levels and the subsequent
death of species which are O2
 dependent.
Evaporation – the process by which liquid water is converted into a
gaseous state.
Evapotranspiration – combined loss of water at the surface through
evaporation and transpiration by plants.
Exfoliation – the peeling away of outer rock layers of boulders and rock
outcrops by weathering in drylands.
Expansion diffusion – the process by which a disease spreads outwards
into a new area while carriers in the source area remain infected.
Explosive eruption – a violent eruption owing to the build-up of pressure
within a volcano, due to viscous magma (e.g. andesite) preventing the
escape of gases (especially steam).
Extending flow – the movement of glacial ice down a steep gradient,
during which it thins.
Farmers’ markets – a market where local farmers sell their produce
directly to the consumer.
Fault scarp – a cliff or escarpment formed directly by rocks being
displaced either side of a fault.
Ferrous minerals – minerals with a significant iron content, e.g. iron ores.
Fetch – the distance of open water in one direction from a coastline, over
which the wind can blow.
Flash flood – a sudden and violent flood event caused by intense rainfall
and rapid run-off.
Flocculation – a process by which salt causes the aggregation of minute
clay particles into larger masses that are too heavy to remain suspended
in water.
Flocs – a mass formed in a fluid by the aggregation of suspended particles.
Flood basalt – a large area of basaltic lava erupted over a long period
(thousands of years) from multiple vents, e.g. the Deccan Plateau.
Flow map – a numerical map that represents the movement of people,
goods or information by lines where widths are proportional to flows.
Flow resources – renewable natural resources that can be used and are
replenished at the same time, e.g. solar, wind and tidal energy.
Flux – the rate of energy transfer per unit area.
Fog – cloud at ground level caused by radiative cooling and advection.
Food chain – a series of organisms through which food energy moves
before it is completely expended.
Food miles – the distance food items travel from farmer to consumer.
Food security – when there is access to sufficient food for individuals to
lead a healthy life.
Food supply chain – the process whereby food moves from producer to
consumer. It involves production, processing, distribution, storage,
consumption and disposal.
Food web – a series of food chains linked together across different trophic
levels within an ecosystem.
Forced labour – when people are coerced to work through use of violence
or intimidation, or by more subtle means of detention such as retention of
identity papers.
Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) – inward investment by a foreign
company (usually a large TNC) in a country.
Freeze-thaw – a mechanical weathering process caused by water, confined
in rock joints, expanding as it freezes, and as a result breaking rocks into
smaller particles.
Frequency distribution curve – a type of line graph showing the
distribution of values in a data set by classes or categories.
Friedmann’s core-periphery model – four-stage model of spatial
economic development where development is initially concentrated in
the economic core and eventually diffuses to the periphery.
Frost heave – the downslope displacement of soil particles that results from
cycles of freeze-thaw.
Gelifluction – the slow, downslope mass flow of saturated regolith resting
on a layer of permafrost.
Genetically modified crops – genetic engineering applied to food crops to
increase production, quality, and resistance to disease or drought.
Gentrification – process by which former low-income inner city housing
districts in ACs are invaded by higher-income groups and refurbished.
Geographic Information Systems (GIS) – integrated computer tools for
gathering, storing, processing and analysing geographical data that can be
plotted on maps.
Geomorphic – relating to the formation and shaping of landforms and
landscapes by natural processes.
Geopolitics – term used in the early twentieth century in the ‘Heartland’
work of Sir Halford Mackinder, referring to ways in which geographical
factors were central in shaping international politics.
Ghetto – concentration of people with similar socio-economic, cultural or
ethnic background within a well-defined small part of an urban area.
Gini coefficient – a statistical measure of the degree of similarity between
two sets of percentage data.
Glacial – a prolonged cold climatic phase lasting for tens of thousands of
years and causing continental glaciation in middle and high latitudes.
Glacier mass balance – the difference between the amount of snow and ice
accumulation and the amount of ablation occurring in a glacier over one
year.
Glacio-fluvial – relating to meltwater from a glacier.
Global commons – the Earth’s shared natural resources, e.g. the oceans and
the atmosphere.
Global dimming – release of aerosols to the atmosphere by burning fossil
fuels. The aerosols reflect insolation and lower global temperatures.
Global governance – intervention by the global community, attempting to
regulate issues, such as human rights, sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Global Positioning System – a navigation system using satellites to
provide location, velocity and time for the device possessing GPS.
Global shift – the locational movement of manufacturing production in
particular from ACs to EDCs and LIDCs from the 1970s onwards.
Global supply chains – flows of materials, products, information, services
and finance in a network of suppliers, manufacturers, distributors and
customers around the world.
Global value chains – formed when the different stages of production are
located across different countries. Companies attempt to optimise their
operations by locating various stages of production across different
locations.
Globalisation – the growing integration and interdependence of people’s
lives in a complex process with economic, social (cultural), political and
environmental components.
Globesity – the widespread increase in excess average weight due to poor
diet and lack of exercise.
Glycosides – a compound formed from sugar and another compound. Many
medicinal drugs are glycosides derived from plants.
Graben – the downfaulted section of a rift valley.
Granular disintegration – the breakdown of rocks by weathering into
coarse, granular particles.
Green belt – zone of predominantly rural land use on the periphery of an
urban area where strict controls on development apply.
Greenfield site – land not previously built on and on which new
developments are proposed or constructed.
Greenhouse gas – gases in the atmosphere such as CO2
, CH4
 and water
vapour which absorb long-wave terrestrial radiation.
Groundwater – water stored underground in permeable and porous rocks
known as aquifers.
Groundwater flow – the horizontal movement of water within aquifers.
Guyot – flat-topped seamount with its summit well below the ocean
surface. Many appear to have volcanic origin, having formed at midocean ridges.
Gyre – a very large circulation of surface water between 20° and 30° N and
S in the oceans.
Halocline – the depth in the ocean where there is a rapid change in salinity
of sea water.
Hard engineering – the controlled disruption of natural processes by using
man-made structures, e.g. sea wall, levées.
Heat balance – the difference between inputs of solar energy to the Earth–
atmosphere system and energy outputs from terrestrial radiation and
gases in the atmosphere. Currently inputs exceed outputs and the global
climate responds by warming.
Heat island – elevated temperatures found in large urban areas caused by
emissions of heat, low albedo of urban surfaces, air pollution etc.
Hierarchical diffusion – the process by which a disease spreads through a
structured order of places, e.g. from major cities to towns and villages.
Histogram – a type of bar chart where the frequency of values is
represented in classes or categories.
Host – an animal that sustains a reservoir for pathogens such as bacteria
and viruses, e.g. bats and rabies.
Hot spot – an area of intense volcanic activity where a mantle plume
reaches the Earth’s surface causing eruptions. Located away from plate
boundaries, e.g. Hawaii.
Household – one person living alone, or a group of people (not necessarily
related) living at the same address.
Housing tenure – the system under which housing is occupied, e.g. owneroccupiers or tenants renting from a landlord.
Human rights – basic rights and freedoms inherent to all human beings, to
which all people are entitled without discrimination.
Human rights norms – established customary behaviour based on moral
principles and ways of living inculcated into the culture of a country or
area over a long period of time.
Humanitarian intervention – action taken (often by a third-party country
or multilateral agency like the UN) in a sovereign state to protect people
at risk from war, famine, flood, genocide etc.
Hydration – the breakdown of rocks by cycles of wetting (expansion) and
drying (contraction).
Hydrocarbons – the main chemical compounds making up fossil fuels.
Hydrothermal vent – very hot water springs, rich in dissolved minerals,
flowing from the ocean floor at mid-ocean ridges or hot spots.
Hydrostatic pressure – the pressure exerted by a confined fluid, such as
water under or in a glacier.
Hypothesis – a statement whose validity can be tested using scientific
methodology.
Ice shelf – a floating sheet of ice permanently attached to a land mass.
Ice wedge cast – a downward tapering body of sediment differentiated
from surrounding regolith by texture and/or colour. Casts are evidence of
former ice wedges which developed during past periglacial conditions.
Ice-contact drift – sediment deposited under or against ice.
Icon – something that has meaning as being representative of a place,
culture or religion. In the urban landscape a building can become an icon,
e.g. Buckingham Palace.
Immigration – in-migration of people into a country, which involves a
permanent change of residence.
Import substitution – promotion and development of industries within a
country aimed at reducing manufacturing imports.
Independence – a situation in which the people of a country exercise selfgovernment and sovereignty over their state territory having gained
political freedom from outside control.
Independent variable – a variable causing change in another (dependent)
variable, e.g. rainfall influencing river flow.
Indigenous – something that originates naturally from a particular location.
Infant mortality rate – annual number of deaths of infants under one year
old per 1000 live births.
Infectious disease – a disease spread by parasites, bacteria, viruses, fungi
etc.
Infiltration – the vertical movement of rainwater through the soil.
Infiltration capacity – the maximum rate at which water, under the pull of
gravity, soaks into the soil.
Informal sector – those parts of the economy outside official recognition
and record. People do not need formal qualifications to be employed in it,
neither is there regulation of it.
Input – an addition of energy and/or materials to a system.
Inselberg – an isolated, steep-sided mountain, often surrounded by
extensive plains.
Insolation weathering – the in situ breakdown of rocks in tropical and subtropical deserts caused by extreme diurnal changes in surface
temperature.
Inter-glacial – a period of climatic warming (lasting c.10,000 years)
between glacials.
Inter-regional trade – the flow of international trade among major world
regions such as Europe, North America and Asia.
Inter-tropical convergence zone – area of permanent low pressure around
the Equator which forms the rising limb of the Hadley cell. It is
associated with instability, convection and thunderstorms.
Interception loss – rainwater stored temporarily on the leaves, stems and
branches of vegetation which is evaporated and does not reach the
ground surface.
Interdependence – interrelationships between ACs, EDCs and LIDCs
through trade, FDI, foreign aid and migration.
International border – geographical boundary of a sovereign state,
defined and recognised by international law, and identified on the
political map of the world.
International community – all countries whose identity and sovereignty
are recognised under the auspices of the UN, plus other international
organisations that choose to participate in global discussions and
decision-making and which act collectively to resolve humanitarian
issues.
International law – body of law that governs international relations
between states or nations. This provides the framework for the
obligations of states to be maintained.
International migrant stock – the number of people born in a country
other than that in which they live. This also includes refugees.
International treaties – international agreements concluded between
states, in written form and governed by international law.
Interpolation – the insertion of isolines (e.g. contours) to a point pattern
which assumes that the gradient of change between fixed points is
constant.
Interval scale – a numerical scale in which zero is arbitrary (e.g.
temperature).
Intervening obstacles – physical, economic, social and political factors
which may disrupt or terminate a migration at any point between origin
and destination.
Intervention – actions of a state, group of states or international
organisations in a foreign territory to end gross violations of human
rights. This includes military force, economic sanctions and the
assistance of NGOs.
Intra-regional trade – the flow of international trade within one or other of
the major world regions such as Europe or Asia.
IPCC – Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change is a body made up of
hundreds of scientists from around the world who research and regularly
report on climate change.
Island arc – chain of volcanic islands formed along a subduction zone.
Isostatic – relating to vertical movements of the Earth’s crust.
Isostatic changes – changes in the absolute level of the land. They are
localised and result from either tectonic activity or the addition or
removal of weight from the land.
Jökulhaulps – extreme glacial meltwater outbursts caused by geothermal
or volcanic activity beneath glaciers.
‘Just in time’ (JIT) – a system companies use to increase efficiency and
decrease storage costs and waste. Products are delivered immediately
(just) as they are required.
Key settlement – rural settlement where services (e.g. schools, doctors’
surgeries, shops) are concentrated to meet thresholds that will ensure
their economic viability.
Kinetic energy – the capacity to do work as a result of motion.
Knowledge economy – wealth creating activities that gather, store and
analyse knowledge, e.g. high-tech manufacturing, finance,
telecommunications, business services, design, education and health.
Krill – small, shrimp-like crustacea that feed on plankton and are then
themselves a major source of food for other organisms
Lag deposit – extensive, coarse, rocky particles in deserts, too large to be
transported by wind action.
Lag time – the difference in time between maximum rainfall and peak river
discharge.
Land degradation – the deterioration of land suitability for agriculture by
soil erosion, desertification and salinisation.
Land grabbing – a process whereby rich countries acquire land in poorer
countries.
Landscape – the visible features (landforms) of an area of the Earth’s
surface.
Lateral moraine – a ridge of till running along the edge of a glacial valley.
Leaching – soluble materials draining away in soil.
Levées – ridges of coarse deposits found alongside stream channels and
elevated above the floodplain.
Life cycle – the progress of a person through various stages based on age
and family unit, from infancy to old age.
Linear dune – narrow, ridge-like dunes, often tens of kilometres in length
and aligned in the direction of the prevailing wind.
Liquefaction – the process by which sediments and soils lose their
mechanical strength from a sudden loss of cohesion. The material is
temporarily transformed into a fluid as the result of being violently
shaken during an earthquake.
Lithification – the transformation of sediments into rock.
Lithology – the chemical and physical characteristics of rock types.
Lithosphere – layer in the Earth’s mantle above the asthenosphere together
with the crust which is divided into a series of tectonic plates. The
lithosphere is rigid and is moved by the flows of semi-molten rock in the
asthenosphere.
Loam – soil with a balanced textural composition of sand, silt and clay.
Loess – a wind-blown deposit of fine particles and dust that weathers to
form fertile but easily eroded soils.
Longshore drift – the movement of sediment by waves and currents along
a coastline.
Low-income developing countries – countries that are eligible for
financial support from the IMF through the Poverty Reduction and
Growth Trust.
Malnutrition – shortages of proteins and essential vitamins caused by an
unbalanced diet.
Marine snow – the remains of organisms living in the ocean’s upper layer
which falls to deeper water. It represents an important transfer of energy
from the photic zone to the ocean depths.
Mass movement – the downslope transportation of material under gravity.
Maternal mortality rate – annual number of deaths of women while
pregnant, or within 42 days of termination of pregnancy, from any cause
related to or aggravated by the pregnancy or its management. Measured
per 100,000 live births.
Median – the middle value in a data set where values are ranked in order of
magnitude.
Merchandise – commodities or products (not services) available for sale.
Mesa – an extensive, steep-sided, flat-topped upland.
Methane hydrate – a structure of ice that contains methane between ice
crystals and is found in ocean floor sediments.
Microclimate – local climates whose main characteristics are determined
by topography and land use.
Mid-ocean ridge – the boundary between two diverging oceanic plates. It
consists of two parallel chains of submarine mountains separated by a
graben, and offset in places by transform faults.
Migrant remittances – money transferred from one country to another,
sent home by migrants to their family, friends and community.
Militarisation – a significant increase in military activity in a place.
Millennium Development Goals – targets set by the UN in 2000 to
improve people’s lives in areas such as child mortality, gender equality,
poverty and hunger.
Mode – the class of values that occurs most frequently in a data set.
Modified Mercalli scale – a subjective measure of earthquake intensity
using factors such as what was felt by people and the type and scale of
damage to buildings and infrastructure.
Moho – short for Mohoroviĉić discontinuity, the boundary between the
crust and mantle. It lies at c 35 km beneath the continents and 10–15 km
beneath the ocean floor.
Moment Magnitude Scale (Mw) – a measure of earthquake strength using
the amount of physical movement caused by a quake.
Monoculture – the cultivation of a single crop.
Multinational corporation – a firm with the power to co-ordinate and
control operations in several countries.
Multiplier effect – the process by which a new or expanding economic
activity in an area creates additional employment as its employees have
money to spend on goods and services. As the wealth of an area increases
it stimulates more economic activity.
Myrdal’s model of circular and cumulative causation – initial
advantages to economic development in a core region, such as natural
resources or accessibility, trigger a series of virtuous growth cycles
through positive feedback, leading to further economic growth and the
acquired advantages of agglomeration.
Nation building – processes by which a state government promotes
nationality, for example through its education system or the media.
Nation-state – a nation which has its own independent state; the boundaries
of the state coincide with the area inhabited by the nation.
Nation – large group of people with strong bonds of identity, united by
shared descent, history, traditions, culture and language.
Natural capital – natural resources with a value to humans.
Natural income – annual yield from natural resources such as timber, fish,
plants and mineral ores.
Nearshore zone – the area of coastal environment between mean high tide
and mean low tide.
Negative feedback – an automatic response to change in a system that
restores equilibrium.
Net migration – difference between the number of people moving
permanently into an area and out of that area.
Net primary productivity (NPP) – the rate at which plants accumulate
energy in the form of organic matter taking into account the energy used
in respiration.
New International Division of Labour – reorganisation of production at
the global scale, as a result of deindustrialisation in advanced countries
and the global spread of MNCs. This has produced an overall pattern of
higher-paid managerial jobs in ACs and lower-paid labouring jobs in
LIDCs.
Nivation hollow – a depression formed by freeze-thaw and meltwater
transport of weathered rock particles beneath a permanent snow patch.
Nominal – when data is classified into categories.
Non-communicable disease – a disease that cannot be spread between
people, e.g. diabetes.
Non-ferrous minerals – minerals that do not contain iron, e.g. manganese
and copper.
Non-infectious disease – a non-communicable disease due to age, genetic
defects, e.g. cancer.
Non-point source pollution – release of pollutants from numerous,
dispersed sources, e.g. gases from vehicles or ships or chemical run-off
from agriculture.
Non-renewable resources – resources that are finite on human timescales.
Once used they cannot be replaced, e.g. fossil fuels and minerals.
Normal frequency curve – a symmetrical, bell-shaped frequency curve
where most values cluster around the mean.
Norms – moral principles, customs and ways of living that are universally
accepted as standard behaviour.
Nutrition spectrum – a scale of diet and nutrition that marks critical
thresholds in human health, e.g. starvation and obesity.
Ocean conveyor belt – see thermohaline circulation.
Ocean currents – the large scale horizontal flow of ocean water (at the
surface and at depth) driven by planetary winds and contrasts in water
temperature and salinity.
Ocean trench – narrow deep depression on the ocean floor adjacent to a
subduction zone.
Ognip – the remains of a collapsed pingo, forming a depression surrounded
by circular earth ramparts.
Open system – a type of system whose boundaries are open to both inputs
and outputs of energy and matter.
Ordinal scale – a numerical scale where values are represented by their
rank order in a data set.
Orthogonals – imaginary lines, perpendicular to wave fronts, representing
the transfer of energy as a wave moves towards the coast.
Output – the transfer of energy and/or materials out of a system.
Outsourcing – cost saving strategy where a company that has comparative
advantage provides goods or services for another company even though
they could be produced in-house.
Outwash – material deposited by glacial meltwater.
Outwash plain – a flat expanse of glacio-fluvial sediment located beyond
an existing or former glacier or ice sheet front.
Overcultivation – cultivation which, given environmental resources, is not
sustainable in the long term and is evidenced by declining yields, soil
exhaustion and soil erosion.
Overgrazing – excessive grazing of land by livestock which destroys or
degrades pasture and is not sustainable.
Overland flow – rainfall that runs off the ground surface either because the
soil is saturated or the intensity of rainfall exceeds the soil’s infiltration
capacity.
Overnutrition – prolonged excessive food intake, which increases body
weight.
Oxidation – a chemical process that weathers certain types of rock and
involves the absorption of oxygen from either the atmosphere or water by
rock minerals.
Palaeomagnetism – traces of changes in the Earth’s magnetic field in the
alignment of magnetic minerals in sedimentary and igneous rocks.
Pandemic – an epidemic which spreads worldwide, e.g. Spanish flu
Peak discharge – the maximum flow (in cumecs) of a river in response to a
rainfall event.
Pediment – an extensive, gently sloping rock platform extending from the
foot of a plateau-like feature in dryland environments.
Pelagic – the environment of the open ocean but not including the ocean
floor.
Percolation – the movement of surface and soil water into underlying
permeable rocks.
Permaculture – sustainable, high yielding and intensive agriculture based
on natural processes.
Permafrost – permanently frozen soil and regolith.
Permeability – the ability of a rock to absorb water through rock joints,
pores etc.
Permeable rock – a type of rock that is penetrated by water, either through
mineral pores (air spaces) or along joints, faults and fissures.
Photic zone – shallow layer of water in the ocean that light penetrates, on
average to about 50 m.
Photoperiod – length of day, i.e. from sunrise to sunset.
Photosynthesis – process by which green plants convert water and CO2
into starch and sugar in the presence of sunlight.
Phreatic – an eruption of steam from a volcano caused when groundwater
meets magma.
Phytoplankton – tiny photosynthesising marine organisms in the surface
waters of the oceans.
Pillow lava – rounded mounds of lava erupted along mid-oceanic ridges,
which cool rapidly on contact with sea water.
Pinch points – a point where congestion is likely to occur.
Pingo – a conical ice-cored hill in periglacial environments.
Plant succession – the sequence of changes within a plant community as it
develops through time.
Playa – a basin-like area of inland drainage in a dryland region. After heavy
rain it may contain a shallow, temporary lake.
Player – individual or organisation with an interest and or influence in
actions, decisions or operations. Also known as a stakeholder.
Pluton – mass of igneous rock injected into overlying rock deep in the
crust.
Pluvial – a climatic period associated with higher rainfall and more humid
conditions in the recent geological past.
Point source pollution – release of pollutants from a single clearly
identifiable source, e.g. a factory chimney or sewage pipe.
Pollution – the process by which human activity contaminates the
environment, with adverse effects on the quality of air, water etc. and the
health of people and other organisms.
Polyculture – the cultivation of several different crops, often
simultaneously in the same field.
Porosity – the ability of a rock, like chalk, to absorb water through tiny air
spaces (or pores) between mineral particles.
Porous rock – rocks which contain pores or air spaces between mineral
particles, where water is stored.
Positive feedback – an automatic response to change in a system which
generates further change.
Post-industrial – a society and economy no longer dominated by the
secondary sector but one where the great majority of people are involved
in tertiary activities.
Potential energy – the capacity to do work that a body possesses by virtue
of its position and that is potentially transformable into another form of
energy.
Potential evapotranspiration – the amount of moisture that could in
theory be evaporated and transpired from a surface, assuming that
moisture is freely available all year round.
Potentiometric surface – an imaginary surface that defines the theoretical
level to which water would rise in a confined aquifer.
Precipitation – moisture (rain, snow, hail) falling from clouds towards the
ground.
Pressure melting point – the temperature at which ice melts when under
pressure.
Price shocks – an unexpected and unpredictable change in prices. It can be
positive or negative.
Primary data – information that is unprocessed and often collected by
research.
Primary producer – green plants (both terrestrial and marine) that convert
sunlight, CO2
 and mineral nutrients in photosynthesis, into organic
matter (chemical energy).
Primary sector – economic activities that produce food, fuel and raw
materials, e.g. agriculture, forestry, fishing, mining, quarrying and water
supplies.
Producer organisms – organisms that capture energy from the Sun in the
process of photosynthesis and store this energy as organic matter.
Proglacial lakes – a body of water impounded in front of a glacier.
Protozoa – single-celled micro-organisms that get their energy from the
surrounding environment.
Pull factors – positive attributes of a place or destination which attract
migrants.
Push factors – negative attributes of a migrant’s place of origin which
force a migrant to leave.
Pyramidal peak – an angular, sharply pointed mountain peak which results
from corrie erosion.
Quadrat sampling – a type of spatial sampling employing squares as
sampling units. In fieldwork quadrats are often metre-square frames.
Quartile – a quarter part of a data set ranked in order of size or magnitude.
Qualitative data – information focused on how people view, experience,
construct and represent places.
Quantitative data – information that can be measured in terms of numbers
and/or frequencies.
Quaternary sector – economic activities that provide services to other
economic activities, e.g. finance, research and development, advertising
and consultancy.
Quota sampling – a type of sampling method that pre-selects a numerical
target of samples based on criteria such as age, residence, economic
status etc. of respondents.
Rain shadow – an area of below average precipitation situated in the lee of
an upland.
Random sampling – a type of sampling that uses random numbers and
where every individual in a population has an equal chance of inclusion
in the sample.
Ratio scale – a numerical scale that has a meaningful zero value.
Rebranding – developments aimed at changing negative perceptions of a
place, making it more attractive to investment.
Recessional moraines – a series of ridges running transversely across a
glacial trough.
Recharge – net input of water into an aquifer causing a rise in the water
table.
Refugee – a person who has moved outside the country of his/her
nationality or usual domicile because of genuine fear of persecution or
death.
Reg – a stony, rocky desert.
Regeneration – the investment of capital and ideas into an area to revitalise
and renew its socio-economic and environmental status.
Regolith – a loose layer of rocky material overlying bedrock.
Reimaging – developments associated with rebranding and usually
involving cultural, artistic or sporting elements.
Relative humidity – the mass of water vapour in a given volume of air as a
ratio of the mass needed to saturate it.
Relocation diffusion – the process by which a disease spreads into a new
area and evacuates its area of origin.
Renewable resource – a resource capable of regeneration on human
timescales, such as most forests and fish stocks.
Residence time – the length of time that a molecule of water or carbon
dioxide etc. remains in natural storage (e.g. in the atmosphere or oceans).
Resilience – the degree to which an area can recover from the impacts of a
hazard. The level of vulnerability affects a community’s resilience.
Respiration – the process in living organisms where the intake of oxygen
oxidises organic substances to produce energy and release carbon
dioxide.
Responsibility to Protect – individual states have the primary
responsibility to protect their populations from genocide, war crimes,
crimes against humanity and ethnic cleansing.
Richter scale – system measuring the magnitude of an earthquake by using
the energy released when overstrained rocks suddenly fracture. Uses a
logarithmic scale, with just over 9.0 being the largest quake measured to
date.
Rift valley – a valley formed by downfaulting between parallel faults.
Examples are found on land (East African Rift Valley) and along midoceanic ridges.
Rip currents – strong and relatively narrow currents of water that flow
seaward against breaking waves.
River discharge – the volume of water flowing in a river channel,
measured in cubic metres per second (cumecs).
Rock flour – fine material derived from abrasion by a glacier.
Rock glacier – coarse rock particles forming linear accumulations and
moving slowly downslope due to the formation and melting of interstitial
ice.
Rock groynes – low walls made of resistant pieces of rock and built out
from the coast into the sea.
Run-off – the movement of water across the land surface.
Salinisation – the accumulation of salts in soil.
Salinity – level of concentration of dissolved salts in water expressed as
parts per thousand.
Salt weathering – the breakdown of permeable rocks by the internal
growth of salt crystals precipitated out of solution.
Saltpans – flat areas of ground covered with salt deposited by the
evaporation of saline water.
Sand sea – a vast area of sand dunes, completely covering the solid rock
surfaces at depth.
Saturated overland flow – the movement of water across the ground –
often as a thin film – when the soil is saturated.
Sea-floor spreading – lateral movement of new oceanic crust away from a
mid-ocean ridge (constructive plate boundary). A key process in the
theory of continental drift.
Seamount – a volcanic peak rising steeply from the ocean floor. Some are
isolated while others occur in chains extending away from a mid-ocean
ridge or hot spot.
Secession – transfer of part of a state’s area and population to another state.
Secondary data – data which have been processed/and or published, e.g.
books, articles, blogs etc.
Secondary sector – economic activities involving manufacturing
industries, e.g. processing raw materials, making semi-finished and
finished goods.
Sediment budget – the balance of the sediment volume entering and
exiting a particular section of coast.
Sediment cell – a stretch of coastline and its associated nearshore area
within which the movement of coarse sediment, sand and shingle is
largely self-contained.
Seismic – relates to earthquakes or other movements of the Earth and its
crust.
Self-determination – right of a group with a distinctive territorial identity
to freely determine its political status and freely pursue its economic,
social and cultural development.
Separatism – claims for, or practice of, separation of a group of people
from a larger state on the basis of their ethnicity or unified national
culture, traditions, religion and language.
Services – tradeable activities providing expertise which relies on workforce skills, experience and knowledge rather than processing or
production of physical materials. Producer services include legal and
financial services for other firms. Consumer services include education
and health care for local communities.
Settling velocity – the speed required for suspended particles of a given
size, transported by rivers, the wind and tidal currents, to be deposited.
Shield volcano – a volcano with a broad base and gently sloping sides. It
forms from the effusive eruption of fluid basalt lava.
Shifting cultivation – a traditional method of cultivation in tropical forests
which involves rotation of land rather than rotation of crops.
Sill – a minor, approximately horizontal, intrusion of magma into
surrounding older rocks.
Single market – an economic union of countries trading with each other
without any internal borders or tariffs.
Sink – anything that absorbs more of a particular substance than it releases,
e.g. the oceans act as a sink for CO2
.
Skewness – the extent to which a frequency curve deviates from a normal,
symmetrical pattern.
Social inequality – the unequal distribution of factors such as income,
education or health across a population.
Soft engineering – the deployment of natural, sustainable processes to
protect the environment from erosion, flooding etc., rather than hard
engineering structures, e.g. beaches and salt marshes rather than sea
walls.
Solar output – the amount of radiant energy emitted by the Sun and
intercepted by the Earth. Most solar output is short-wave.
Solifluction – the slow flow of fine, water-saturated regolith from higher to
lower ground.
Solution – the chemical weathering process by which rock minerals are
dissolved.
Sovereignty – the absolute authority that independent states exercise in the
government of the land and peoples in their territory.
Spatial inequality – the unequal distribution of factors such as income,
education or health across geographic space at any scale.
Stability – the atmospheric condition where an air parcel displaced from its
original level returns to the same level (i.e. because it is heavier/denser
than the surrounding air).
Stadial – a sudden and brief period of glacial conditions lasting several
hundred years.
Stakeholder – see player.
Standard deviation – the most mathematical measurement of dispersion in
a data set (i.e. the root mean square deviation).
Standard error of the mean – the standard deviation of a sampling
distribution.
Star dune – a pyramid-shaped sand dune which develops where there is no
dominant wind direction.
State – area of land, of an independent country, with well-defined
boundaries, within which there is a politically organised body of people
under a single government.
State apparatus – set of state institutions and organisations through which
state power is exercised; these include legal mechanisms, administrative
organisations, police and armed forces, and health, education and welfare
services.
Statistical population – the entire pool from which a statistical sample is
drawn (e.g. all the pebbles on a shingle beach).
Statistical significance – the likelihood that the outcome from a sample
survey is not due to chance. It is normally set at 95% probability.
Stemflow – the flow of water along the branches and stems of trees and
other plants to the ground.
Stone garlands – elongated accumulations of stones on a slope.
Storm surge – elevated sea surface near the coast most often caused by
extreme storms (e.g. hurricanes) and tsunamis.
Storm wave – a wave generated locally by high wind energy.
Strata – the layers or beds found in sedimentary rock.
Stratified sampling – a sample drawn from a heterogeneous statistical
population divided into groups.
Stratiform clouds – clouds lying in a level sheet.
Strato-volcano – a steep-sided volcano made up of layers of lava and ash
emitted during explosive eruptions. Also known as a composite cone.
Striations – scratches or grooves on rock surfaces formed by glacial
abrasion.
Structure – the physical characteristics of rocks, including their jointing,
bedding, faulting, angle of dip etc.
Sub-aerial process – a collective term for weathering and mass movement
processes.
Subduction – the tectonic process found at convergent plate margins where
an oceanic plate descends into the Earth’s mantle and is destroyed.
Sublimation – the phase change of water from ice to vapour.
Super-volcano – a volcano that erupts more than 1000 km3
 of material in a
single eruption event.
Superpower – states with a dominant position in the international system
capable of exerting their power (economic, cultural, political) globally.
Surface wash – rainwater that runs-off the ground surface but is not
confined within a channel.
Swash – the movement of water up a beach after a wave has broken.
Swell wave – a relatively smooth ocean wave that travels some distance
from the area of its generation.
Symbiosis – the close association between two or more organisms of
different species, often but not necessarily benefiting each member.
Syncline – a downfolded, basin-like geological structure.
System – a group of objects and the relationships between them.
Systematic sampling – a sample drawn at regular intervals from a
population (e.g. every 10 m, every nth person).
Talik – unfrozen ground.
Talus – a steep, concave debris slope at the foot of a cliff or free-face,
comprising angular rock particles (also known as a scree slope).
Tectonic plate – a large slab of the Earth’s lithosphere and crust.
Temperature inversion – an increase in temperature with height, i.e. the
reverse of the normal temperature profile.
Terminal moraine – a ridge of till extending across a glacial trough.
Terms of trade – value of a country’s exports relative to that of its imports.
This is measured as: average price of exports ÷ average price of imports
× 100. If export prices rise relative to import prices, there is improvement
in a country’s terms of trade
Territorial integrity – principle that the defined territory of a state, over
which it has exclusive and legitimate control, is inviolable. This is
enshrined in the Charter of the UN and an important part of international
law.
Territory – extent of land under the jurisdiction of a sovereign state.
Tertiary sector – economic activities providing services, e.g. education and
health, legal, financial, insurance, government.
Thermal energy – the capacity to do work as a result of heat.
Thermal expansion of water – increase in volume of water due to its rise
in temperature.
Thermocline – the depth in the ocean where there is a rapid change in
water temperature.
Thermohaline circulation – the global pattern of ocean currents (surface
and sub-surface) driven primarily by differences in temperature and
salinity.
Threshold – the minimum number of people or spending required to
support a good or service.
Threshold (coastal) – the relatively shallow part of a ria or fjord at its
seaward end.
Throughfall – rainfall, initially intercepted by vegetation, which drips to
the ground.
Throughflow – water flowing horizontally through the soil to stream and
river channels.
Tidal range – the vertical difference in height between consecutive high
and low waters over a tidal cycle.
Till – unsorted material deposited directly by glacial ice.
Time-space compression – a set of processes leading to a ‘shrinking world’
caused by reductions in the relative distance between places, e.g. travel
time.
Tipping point – the critical point or threshold which if passed leads to
irreversible change, e.g. the moment when summer sea ice in the Arctic
disappears, which would alter the Atlantic thermohaline circulation.
Trade liberalisation – the process of making international trade free from
barriers such as taxes on imports. The WTO has been instrumental in
promoting free trade between member countries and has therefore played
an important role in economic globalisation and the expansion of world
trade.
Trade winds – prevailing winds that blow southeast and northeast towards
the Equator from the sub-tropics.
Tragedy of the commons – a metaphor illustrating how individuals can
overexploit a resource in common ownership (e.g. the atmosphere, fish in
the deep ocean), leading to its depletion or degradation.
Transform faults – large-scale faults in the crust at right angles to a midocean ridge, which range from a few tens of kilometres to several
hundred. Earthquakes occur along their lengths as they slip.
Transnational corporation – very large company with factories and
offices in more than one country, which markets products and services
worldwide.
Transpiration – the evaporation of moisture from pores on the leaf
surfaces of plants.
Transportation – The movement of material by the kinetic energy of a
medium such as water, wind or ice.
Treaty – formally concluded and ratified agreement between states.
Tree line – The latitudinal and altitudinal limit of tree growth.
Trench – a narrow, deep depression on the ocean floor, adjacent to a
subduction zone.
Trophic level – the level at which energy in the form of food is transferred
from one organism to another as part of a food chain.
Troposphere – the lowest layer of the atmosphere, which contains virtually
all of the planet’s weather.
Tundra – treeless region in the sub-Arctic and in high mountains which has
a short growing season and severe winter temperatures.
Turbid – cloudy or muddy conditions owing to sediments held in
suspension.
Turbidity – the cloudiness of a fluid caused by large numbers of individual
particles in suspension.
UN Global Compact – initiative that invites companies to align their
strategies and operations according to universal principles on human
rights, labour, environment and anti-corruption, and to take actions that
advance societal goals.
Undernutrition – too little food intake to maintain body weight.
Upper mantle – the layer of the Earth’s interior extending 75–200 km
below the surface (also known as the asthenosphere). The upper mantle is
able to flow under pressure.
Urban heat island – a town or city that is significantly warmer than its
surrounding rural areas due to human activities.
Vector – a carrier, e.g. mosquitoes, that transmits an infectious disease, e.g.
malaria.
Venture capital – investment in small or medium sized enterprises
involving relatively high levels of risk but with the potential for
significant gains. The enterprises are those not yet secure enough to raise
their own finance.
Virtual water – the volume of freshwater needed to make a product,
measured at the place where the product was manufactured.
Viscosity – an indication of how well a substance flows. Acid lavas have
high viscosity as they are sticky and do not flow far from a vent.
Volcanic Explosivity Index (VEI) – combines magnitude and intensity of
an eruption on a logarithmic scale, 0 = least explosive, 8 = most
explosive.
Vulnerability – measure of the level of risk an area faces from the impacts
of a hazard. Levels of vulnerability are influenced by physical, social,
economic and political factors.
Water balance – the relationship between precipitation, streamflow,
evapotranspiration, and soil moisture and groundwater storage in a
drainage basin over a year.
Water cycle budget – the annual volume of movement of water by
precipitation, evapotranspiration, run-off etc. between stores such as
oceans, permeable rocks, ice sheets, vegetation, soil etc.
Water table – the upper surface of the zone of saturation in permeable
rocks and the soil.
Wave period – the time interval between successive wave crests arriving at
a given point.
Wave refraction – the reorientation of wave fronts as they enter shallow
water so that they approach parallel (or roughly parallel) to the shoreline.
Weathering – the in situ breakdown of rocks exposed at, or near, the land
surface by physical, chemical and biological processes.
Westphalian model – The Peace of Westphalia (1648) marked the formal
recognition of states as sovereign and independent political entities; it
established the principle of sovereign equality of states, forming the basis
of international law that governs the global political system today.
Xerophyte – a plant with adaptations that enable it to survive in an
environment with little water.
Zero tillage – a type of arable cultivation designed to minimise moisture
loss from the soil. Its main feature is the absence of ploughing.
Zeugen – tabular-shaped rock outcrops in hot deserts, attributed to wind
erosion.